CRISPRDetect Version 2.2 help:
---------------------
CRISPREDetect is a perl program developed and tested in Fedora 21 Linux operating system. <b>CRISPRDetect.pl</b> should run under any unix based 
operating system that has a working 'perl' executable [comes with default installations under all *nix based operating systems]. If all the
3rd party dependencies are installed and available in user/system $PATH CRISPRDetect should run without any issues. 

The cd-hit-est program installation in Mac operating system were reported to have issues. If you face issues installing cd-hit-est, please 
refer to the link: https://github.com/weizhongli/cdhit/issues/24   


INSTALLATION:
---------------------
Please make sure that the following 3rd party tools are installed in your system. The only CPAN perl package 'Parallel' is provided in the 'lib' folder 
and should work. However, if it doesn't then either execute "cpan Parallel::ForkManager" to install it or execute the following commands after making sure 
you have its dependencies (POSIX, Storable, File::Spec, File::Temp, File::Path 2.00 and Test::More 0.81_01) installed in your system

	wget http://search.cpan.org/CPAN/authors/id/Y/YA/YANICK/Parallel-ForkManager-1.19.tar.gz
	tar xvzf Parallel-ForkManager-1.19.tar.gz
	cd Parallel-ForkManager-1.19
	perl Makefile.PL && make test && make install



CRISPRDetect dependencies: 
---------------------
The following dependencies are needed by CRISPRDetect. 

	clustalw 	Download from ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/software/clustalw2/2.1/ 
	water 		Comes with EMBOSS:6.3.1+ tools : 	Download from ftp://emboss.open-bio.org/pub/EMBOSS/EMBOSS-6.6.0.tar.gz
	seqret 		Comes with EMBOSS:6.3.1+ tools : 	Download from ftp://emboss.open-bio.org/pub/EMBOSS/EMBOSS-6.6.0.tar.gz
	RNAfold 	Comes with Vienna RNA package  :	Download the correct version specific for your operating system from http://www.tbi.univie.ac.at/RNA/#download
	cd-hit-est 	Comes with cdhit package  	   :	Download from http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/download.php  	
	blastn 		Comes with ncbi-blast+ package :	Download from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/blast+/LATEST/

CRISPRDetect requires clustalw2 to be available in the $PATH as clustalw. You can do that by <b>"cp /PATH_TO_CLUSTALW2/clustalw2 /bin/clustalw"</b> or by creating 
a symbolic link <b>"ln -s /PATH_TO_CLUSTALW2/clustalw2 /bin/clustalw"</b> where PATH_TO_CLUSTALW2 is the full path of the directory where the executable clustalw2 is
present. 

Once all the dependencies are installed, please check that they are successfully installed and available in the user/system PATH by typing the following:

	clustalw -help
	water -help
	seqret -help
	RNAfold -help
	cd-hit-est -help
	blastn -help


Basic syntax:	
---------------------

	perl CRISPRDetect.pl -g NZ_CP006019.gbk -o NZ_CP006019_CRISPRDetect.txt > NC_003106_CRISPRDetect.log

The above command runs CRISPRDetect with default paramaeter on a complete gbk file (file containing both annotation and sequence) that has cas1 or cas2 annotated.
	
	perl CRISPRDetect.pl -f test_multifasta.fa -o test_CRISPRDetect -check_direction 0 -array_quality_score_cutoff 3 -T 0 > test.log
        
The above command runs CRISPRDetect with a lower score cutoff on a fasta file, cutoff 3 rather than 4, as cas1 and cas2 are not annotated and would score +1. Appropriate for contigs/fasta. -T 0, use all processors rather than the default of 4. Does not check direction (not recommended) ]
	




Compulsory input parameters for CRISPRDetect:
---------------------
 
	-f/-g		FASTA/Genbank	Specify a FASTA formatted [e.g. -f test.fa] or Genbank formatted file [e.g. -g NZ_CP006019.gbk] containing the sequence. 		
	
	Note: the default cutoff of 4 is appropriate for genbank files that have cas1 or cas2 annoated, 3 is more appropriate for fa.
	
	-o		TEXT		Specify a text file that will contain the output [e.g. -o NC_003106_CRISPRDetect] 			
						Note: CRISPRDetect will provide two additional output files - one containing the filtered out arrays (e.g. NC_003106_CRISPRDetect.fp) 
						and a gff annotation file (e.g. NC_003106_CRISPRDetect.gff)
						
Basic options:
-------------						
	-h/-help	HELP		shows this help text
	-q/-quiet	0 or 1		Switch off/on step by step progress reporting [default 0]	
	-T			Threads		Specify number of parallel processes CRISPRDetect should use  [default 4; specify '-T 0' to use all processors]		
	-tmp_dir	tmp/		This is the default directory where temporary files generated by CRISPRDetect and its dependencies will be stored.	


Parameters for putative CRISPR identification [optional]:
--------------------------------------------------------	
	-word_length			11	This is the default word length CRISPRDetect uses to find the putative CRISPRs. Any positive integer >=6 can be used.
	-minimum_word_repeatation	3	By default CRISPRDetect uses 3 repeating identical words to find putative CRISPRs. To find CRISPRs with 2 repeats, use -minimum_word_repeatation 2	
	-max_gap_between_crisprs	125	By default the maximum gap is set tp 125 nucleotides between the repeating identical seed words.
	-repeat_length_cutoff		17	After the intial processing, putative CRISPRs with repeat lengths less than this value will be rejected.


Filtering parameters [optional]:
-------------------------------	
	-minimum_repeat_length		23	Minimum length of repeats 
	-minimum_no_of_repeats		3	Predicted CRISPRs with number of repeats less than this value will be excluded. To include CRISPRs with only 2 repeats, use -minimum_no_of_repeats 2
	-array_quality_score_cutoff	4	Predicted CRISPRs with score less than this value will be excluded from the output file. 
									The CRISPRs with score >=0 and less than the specied value will be moved to the output.fp file [output refers to user given output filename]. Cutoff of 3 is more appropriate for fasta files.
						

Additional parameters [optional]:
--------------------------------
	-left_flank_length		500	This is the default length of the 5' (upstream) region of the CRISPRs.
	-right_flank_length		500	This is the default length of the 3' (downstream) region of the CRISPRs.		
	


Advanced options [optional]:
---------------------------	
To test different methods as specified in the literature, open the CRISPRDetect.pl program with any text editor [e.g. gedit in RHEL/Fedora/CentOS, or vi in any *nix OS, or 
notepad in Windows OS] and change the parameters in the top most section of the script. To toggle individual methods, locate the '$check_' prefix and change the value to 1 
(i.e. the method will be applied) or 0 (i.e. the method will not be applied). 
	
	Examples:
		
		Direction specific options:
		--------------------------
			$check_direction=0;			[ Default is 1, making it 0 will turn the method off.] 
				
		To change the parameter(s) of a particular method (such as check_array_degeneracy) change the nested variables under that particular method.
		
			$check_array_degeneracy=1;	 
				$array_degeneracy_score=0.41; 		[ Default: PPV (0.91) - 0.50 ]
				$permitted_mutation_per_array=0; 	[ Default 0 ]
	
	Changing to '$permitted_mutation_per_array=2;' will instruct the program to allow maximum 2 bases as permitted mutations per CRISPR array.




NOTE:   
---------------------------	
The 'tmp' folder in the CRISPRDetect installation directory should have read and write permissions. An easy way to do that is by issuing the command 'chmod -R 755 . && chmod 777 tmp' 
from the CRISPRDetect installation directory. If you use CRISPRDetect, then please cite:

	Biswas, A., Staals, R. H., Morales, S. E., Fineran, P. C. & Brown, C. M. CRISPRDetect: a flexible algorithm to define CRISPR arrays. BMC Genomics 17, 356 (2016).

For version updates and bug fixes refer to https://github.com/ambarishbiswas/CRISPRDetect_2.2 
	http://bioanalysis.otago.ac.nz/CRISPRDetect  

 	
